.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH LWKRESET 1 "June 1, 2015"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
lwkreset \- Terminate all Light Weight Kernel (LWK) processes and initialize the LWK environment. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lwkreset [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBlwkreset\fP is a mechanism for terminating Light Weight Kernel (LWK)
processes and initializing LWK environment within a node. If the caller is authorized
to only a subset of the processes, then that subset of processes will be terminated and no
error indication will be surfaced. This mechanism should be used for terminating 
processes within a node when termination through the \fByod\fP launch path is not possible or practical. 

.SH OPTIONS

.PP


.TP
.B --verbose, -v <\fInumber\fP>
Controls the verbosity of \fBlwkreset\fP.  \fINumber\fP is an integer between 0
and 9.  Note that the argument is required.

.TP
.B --help, -h
Prints a terse version of this documentation.


.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
.B lwkreset
The LWK processes will be terminated and the LWK environment will be initialized.


.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

.PP
.B LWKRESET_VERBOSE 
may be used to control the verbosity.  Specifying
\fB--verbose=\fP on the command line takes precedence over this environment
variable.

.SH SEE ALSO
.I yod(1),
.br

.SH AUTHORS
lwkreset was written by John Attinella.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2015 Intel Corp.
