.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Multi Operating System (mOS)
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Intel Corporation.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms and conditions of the GNU General Public License,
.\" version 2, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
.\" more details.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.TH LWKCTL 1 "July 31, 2017"
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
lwkctl \- creates, deletes, or shows Light Weight Kernel (LWK) partition in
Multi-OS (mOS)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lwkctl [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBlwkctl\fP is the command used to partition resources - CPUs and Memory between Linux and LWK in Multi-OS (mOS). It off-lines the resources on Linux and hands it over to LWK. Once this partitioning is complete, further resource partitioning between LWK processes is done using the mOS job launch utility \- \fByod\fP. The \fBlwkctl\fP command requires root privileges to create or delete LWK partition.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B --create, -c 'lwkcpus=<\fIlwkcpu_spec\fP> lwkcpu_profile=<\fIprofile\fP> lwkmem=<\fIlwkmem_spec\fP>'
Creates a new LWK partition. If an LWK partition already exists, then it will be deleted before creating the new partition. LWK CPU and memory specifications for the new partition are passed as arguments in the following format,
.sp 2
lwkcpus=<utility cpu1>.<lwkcpu set1>:<utility cpu2>.<lwkcpu set2>...
.br
(or)
.br
lwkcpus=auto
.sp 2
lwkcpu_profile=<normal or debug>
.br
normal, Filter CPU hotlplug states for LWKCPUs
.br
debug, Do not filter CPU hotplug states for LWKCPUs
.sp 2
By default, 'normal' profile is selected if either <\flwkcpu_profile\fP> is not specified or an invalid profile is specified. /sys/devices/system/cpu/hotplug/states provides the full list of CPU hotplug states for a normal Linux CPU boot. CPU hotplug states which are marked 'LWK' are the only hotplug states through which an LWKCPU will be booted.
.sp 2
lwkmem=<n1>:<size1>,<n2>:<size2>,...
.br
(or)
.br
lwkmem=auto
.br
(or)
.br
lwkmem=auto:max
.sp 2
n1,n2,.. are NUMA node numbers. size1,size2,.. are sizes of the LWKMEM requests on corresponding NUMA node. Based on available kernel movable memory and alignment the designated LWK memory will be less than or equal to the requested size. LWK memory requests are aligned on sparse memory section boundary which is in general set to 128MB. LWK memory is allocated from movable memory of Linux kernel(i.e. from ZONE_MOVABLE pages). To have movable memory on every node the kernel needs to be booted with either \fIkernelcore\fP or \fImovablecore\fP kernel arguments to specify the total non-movable or movable memory in the system respectively. Further these kernel arguments can be combined with the \fImovable_node\fP kernel argument if the system has hotpluggable memory. In such a case only non-hotpluggable memory nodes are considered for non-movable memory.
.sp 2
Ex: Specifying \fIkernelcore=16G movable_node\fP on the kernel command line during the boot up would reserve 16G of non-movable memory for Linux in non-hotpluggable NUMA nodes and rest of the memory is considered movable memory in the system which can be dynamically provisioned between Linux and LWK. All hotpluggable memory nodes will have only movable memory which can be completely provisioned to LWK.
.sp 2
Specifying lwkcpus=auto and lwkmem=auto will cause the system to automatically generate an LWK partition based on the available CPU and memory resources, using the system topology. The resulting LWK partition will work well for many HPC applications. The lwkmem=auto:max specification will aggressively allocate all available memory to the LWK partition without regards to balancing memory designations across the NUMA domains.
.TP
.B --delete, -d
Deletes the existing LWK partition and releases corresponding resources to Linux. Currently
supports only deleting of entire LWK partition.

.TP
.B --show, -s
Displays information of the existing LWK partition.

.TP
.B --raw, -r
Modifies the format of --show/-s option to display the unprocessed partition specification of LWK.

.TP
.B --precise, -p <\fIyes/no\fP>
Modifies the behavior of --create/-c option. If '--precise yes' is specified and the requested memory designation cannot be completed or if the requested memory size for any NUMA domain is not on a 128M boundary, the attempt to create the LWK partition will fail.  If '--precise no' is specified and the requested memory designation cannot be completed, the partition will be created using the available memory. If no option is specified, the default behavior is '--precise no'.

.TP
.B --timeout, -t <\fIseconds\fP>
Specifies the timeout (in seconds) that lwkctl will wait for a serialization lock.  This lock prohibits multiple invocations of lwkctl that alter the partition from running concurrently.  The default is 300 (five minutes).  If specified as zero, then lwkctl will block indefinitely waiting for the lock.

.TP
.B --force, -f
Force the deletion or creation of the partition even if there is a job running on the node.  Please note that using this option could impact active jobs.  And if resources are currently being consumed by active jobs, this option will not necessarily guarantee that those resources are freed or that the partitioning will complete successfully.  Use with caution.

.TP
.B --verbose, -v <\fInumber\fP>
Controls the verbosity of \fBlwkctl\fP.  \fINumber\fP is an integer between 0
and 4.  Note that the argument is required.

.TP
.B --help, -h
Prints a terse version of this documentation.

.SH CPU MASKS AND LISTS
.PP
CPUs in \fBlwkctl\fP are numbered in C fashion.  That is, the first logical CPU
is CPU 0, the second is CPU 1 and so on.
.PP
CPU masks in \fBlwkctl\fP are hexadecimal literals specified in little endian order.
That is, the least significant bit corresponds to CPU 0, and so on.  Masks
must begin with either "0x" or "0X".
.PP
CPU lists are CPU numbers or ranges of numbers separated by commas.
.PP
For example, the list '0-2,8' is equivalent to mask 0x107.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
.B sudo lwkctl -c 'lwkcpus=1.52-67,256-271:69.120-135 lwkcpu_profile=normal lwkmem=0:16G,1:16G,2:16G,3:16G,4:3968M,5:3968M,6:3968M,7:3968M'

Creates LWK partition with following specification,
.RS
LWKCPUs - CPUs 52 to 67 and 256 to 271 will be LWK CPUs. CPU 1 will be a utility CPU used for syscall migration and utility threads. CPUs 120 to 135 will be LWKCPUs. CPU 69 will be a utility CPU used for syscall migration and utility threads.
.br
LWKCPU profile - normal profile, each LWK CPU will be booted through a minimal set of hotplug states.
.br
LWKMEM - Requesting 16G on every NUMA node 0 to 3 and 3968M on every NUMA node 4 to 7
.RE
.TP
.B sudo lwkctl -c 'lwkcpus=52-67,256-271:120-135:1,69. lwkcpu_profile=normal lwkmem=0:16G,1:16G,2:16G,3:16G,4:3968M,5:3968M,6:3968M,7:3968M'
Creates LWK partition like above but with no syscall migration. CPUs 1 and 69 are utility CPUs for utility threads.
.TP
.B sudo lwkctl -c 'lwkcpus=52-67,256-271:120-135 lwkcpu_profile=normal lwkmem=0:16G,1:16G,2:16G,3:16G,4:3968M,5:3968M,6:3968M,7:3968M'
Creates LWK partition similar to above but with no utility CPUs.
.TP
.B sudo lwkctl -c 'lwkcpus=auto lwkmem=auto'
Creates LWK partition, letting the system designate the CPU and memory resources to be used by the LWK partition.

.SH AUTHORS
lwkctl was written by Sharath Kumar Bhat and John Attinella

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2017 Intel Corp.

.SH SEE ALSO
.I yod(1)
.br

